Taking notes and... Good.
All right.
So we're talking to Andras and Jeff.
So we'll just put this here.
I thought you might find this interesting, given that you're interested in libraries.
Oh.
This is about the pillage and dispersion of the Charles Library around the third century.
This is very interesting.
That's interesting, because that was a really freebooting time in Iran.
Zili Sultan, one of the royal princes, dismantled a large part of the Visbahan and sold off the saleable to antiquities dealers and the like.
Well, one thing I haven't, and why that is of particular interest to me, maybe gentlemen have some ideas.
One thing I'm trying to develop is also emigre libraries.
How do people continue to document their existence?
Which is why the connection to the old culture, that kind of thing.
Yeah, really, which is why this Romanov exhibition is in a public library.
Well, only 3,000 items were sold from the, you know, when the Soviets took over and sold the, and then Wartan Gregorian told me about the Polish library in Paris, when there was no Poland.
Yeah.
Yes, there was a government in London and a library in Paris.
There's actually vast literature on the Post-Russian Revolution, Russian emigre press.
I can get you a couple of those.
There's a wonderful article appeared in a fairly obscure source, Journal of Oriental Librarianship or something.
That's my kind of thing.
an off-print of it, I think, on the Russian press in China in the 20s through the 1940s.
The Russian press in China?
Yeah.
And what would it be doing there?
What was the problem?
There were hundreds of thousands of white Russian emigres.
Who made their way through.
So they went to China, and they brought the documents.
I had a friend in school at the University of Chicago who was born in China,
brought up in Australia and came to the U.S.
to do graduate work.
So what happened in 1949, or whatever it was, when the Fabianists took off?
Well, a lot of them moved on, like this fellow who's paid.
They allowed it out.
No, no, no.
A lot of people fled in panic from Shanghai and other places.
I mean, they had a very adventurous time because, you know, there was the Japanese occupation as well.
So where did the materials go?
The materials?
Well, first of all, a lot of them were, like much of the immigration intellectuals.
And so they set up little libraries.
They were incredibly prolific publicists.
And so, you know, you had everybody running his own little literary journal, of which he wrote 90%.
I love it, though.
This is very important stuff.
You had, you know, political movements, religious movements.
You had everything from, you know, various sort of anti-Semitism Marxists.
to deeply religious folk who loathed the atheist regime back home, to even a group that called themselves the Russian Nazi Party,
to set out on the Chinese side of the Manchurian border, a great illuminated swastika to blink across into Solomon, Siberia.
There's a wonderful book on the Russian Nazis who, towards the end of their existence, I think three-quarters of the membership were paid KGB agents reporting on each other.
Well, the reason I'm going to Venice, one of the reasons is that...
the Armenian life.
Well, that's what I was going to say.
As a matter of fact, clearly when immigration is associated with trauma, there seems to be a really profound desire to retain cultural links and so on.
And the Armenian example right here at home in Watertown.
The ALMA, the Armenian Library and Museum of America.
Here in Watertown?
Yeah, right next door.
It's a rather, it's an interesting institution.
Alma, right?
Alma, A-L-A-M.
I can give you the whole museum of a manner, right?
Well, they'll probably tell me everything I need to know before I go to this.
Well, they are, you know, Venice is a different thing.
I mean, Venice goes back to the 18th century.
I understand, but I mean, they'll certainly have knowledge and public documents that will help me.
Can you think of any other examples?
There's a book that was just published by Random House, a $100 book by this woman who has spent the last six years trying to find all the documents that she can of the Kurds, who have 20 million people, but they have no national archive.
So what do they do to preserve their... Well, I don't know if they have any... I mean, they obviously have a modern political literature, isn't there?
I'm sure there's literature that goes way back.
Yeah, but they don't have a formal archive to preserve that stuff.
Yeah, I mean, you had this for all the immigration from the former Soviet Union.
You had the immigration from Nazi-occupied Europe, which did much the same thing.
And in a more modest sense, you had it in the New World, where, for example, modern Czechoslovak
and modern vernacular Arab literature were essentially new world emigrate creations, where Czechoslovakia was founded by Masaryk, who organized in America, and in the case of modern Arab vernacular literature, the vast Arab emigrate community in South America produced the first major literary journals
And, you know, there are Arab libraries in Brazil and... Another person who you would probably talk to... ...a conference of the Middle East Librarians Association that dealt with this is called Mahjar Literature, M-A-H-J-A-R.
Mahjar just means emigration.
Another person locally who would be useful for you to talk to, he's not a Kurd, but he's an authority on Iraq, is Khanan Makiya.
How would you spell that?
M-A-K-I-A, first name K-E-N-A-N.
Oh, I can call him up on Hollis.
Don't you have his card in there?
Oh, I may, but I was thinking I could also print out his publication.
M-A-K-I-Y-A.
M-A-K-I-Y-A?
Anyway, he is very interested in the fate of the Kurds.
He's in exile.
He's written a book on the genocidal activities of the Iraqi regime against the Kurds.
The person you talked about, Kurds, was it a lady?
A woman.
I can't think of her name.
It's a big, big book.
It's Random House.
I've got it at home.
I'll fax you something on it.
It's a very important book, but what she did is she went out.
She's a MacArthur Fellow, so she had money, which is very important.
Well, she's actually using it for something quite productive.
And she's a photographer or journalist, but she was there, and she's actually just tried to go out and find these people and their documents, their photographs, and she's gathered what she found in this book, which is, I think, a very, very important, you know, book.
Certainly something I can mention.
There's a woman in New York I know who is very active on British documents.
This could easily be she, but when I get back, I'll happily email her thanks to her.
But, you know, there's similar things.
You heard, perhaps, about the recent repatriation of the Georgian State Archives from Harvard to Georgia?
No, no, no.
You go to the Harvard Press Office, they'll get you the news releases on it.
Basically— What were they doing at Harvard, though?
Okay, I'll tell you.
Georgia, in the Middle Ages, was an independent kingdom.
In the 18th century,
late 18th, early 19th century, it was absorbed by Russia.
And then after the Russian Revolution, when the Russian Empire broke up, Georgia was one of these many states that enjoyed a very brief independence.
And so there was a Republic of Georgia, and it was recognized by the League of Nations, and it existed for maybe two, three years before the Bolsheviks overran it.
And the fleeing Georgian government took its archives with it.
This is so important.
And the archives survived in the hands of Georgian emigrates in Paris.
And these guys were getting old, and they were worried about the safety of the archives.
So they made a deal with Harvard's Houghton Library to deposit these archives with Houghton with the understanding that when
Georgia became free again, that these would be repatriated.
Well, how come there wasn't a news story on this?
There was.
Was it?
When did this happen?
The Gazette, I think.
This happened like this summer.
It did.
Maybe I was away or something.
Did it make any kind of a splash at all?
That's a spectacular story.
You can see how I get my kick.
You started this.
This all fits into this.
It does.
Because of you, I've gone up to Cornell where they're doing the Cambodia project.
When the Khmer Rouge came in, they destroyed everything.
Lo and behold, however, Cornell has the great Southeast Asian collection.
It's almost a depository thing.
This is where digital stuff, Jeff, is outstanding, because what they're doing is reseeding the Cambodian National Collections digitally with material that's on file.
Did you manage to access the OCLC article?
Not yet.
Oh, yes, I did.
Of course I did.
The Bosnian one.
I'm sorry.
I copied it up.
I did it immediately.
I thought you were talking about something.
No, no, no.
I'm sorry.
Yes, I did.
Absolutely.
I thought you were talking about Cambodia here.
Anyway, since I talked to you last,
series of phone calls and correspondences with my friend in Toronto, I told you we had this breakthrough, and it was really fabulous.
The retired professor who had the materials, Eliazar Birnbaum, it's E-L-E-A-Z-A-R Birnbaum, B-I-R-M-B-A-U-M.
Anyway, he's a retired professor at University of Toronto, and he'd been to Sarajevo in the early 1980s, and he's one of these old-fashioned philologists and scholars of manuscripts, and also, you'd be not surprised, an avid collector of rare books and manuscripts himself.
Anyway, he went to Sarajevo about
17, 18 years ago, in the early 1980s, and did some research at the manuscript libraries there.
He actually published a couple of articles on the manuscript collections there, and he requested photocopies of some manuscripts that interested him for various reasons, including their being related to some manuscripts that he had, you know, by topic or author or whatever.
He got these, and in the long run, he never did anything with the copies, although he's still working on articles.
So how much material did he get, do you think?
All together, it's 350 pages of xeroxes of original manuscripts that are now ashes.
Wow.
And these are probably the only, obviously, this is the only link.
Yeah, so you get the sort of the shadows of the originals survive even though the originals are now gone.
This could go into at least three chapters, you know, I mean, copies.
Well, the interesting thing is when he took these photocopies, he requested them and they were actually mailed to him afterwards.
He also took detailed notes of all the features that wouldn't show up on photocopies, like, you know, bindings, watermarks, and so forth.
And I was talking to my friend in Toronto, the woman who is actually doing the logistics of getting the pages from him, and he's handing over his notes to get copied, too.
And she's very interesting woman, very bright scholar.
She's a professor of history.
Her name is Amila, A-M-I-L-A, Buturovich, B as in boy, U-T as in Tom, U,
R-O-V-I-C.
I'd like to talk to her.
Yeah, I can give you her.
Anyway, she is a scholar of the history of religions and did her thesis on a medieval Arabic manuscript.
And she said when she first looked at these copies, she thought, well, some of these are copies of well-known texts.
It really is the importance of having yet another
copy of a well-known text and then she thought about it and she talked to Birnbaum and suddenly she realized that even if these are well-known texts, they illuminate so many things.
First of all, the intellectual life of a local community through tracing who the copyists were, looking at the owner's marks.
From this deducing what books were being copied
what books were being read and collected in a particular locality, who read whom, who commented on whom.
So could you give me an idea of what the time frame of these manuscripts are?
These manuscripts are mainly, I think, from the 16th century.
They're better if they copy.
There have to be differences, too.
I mean, it's not merely a matter of establishing a text.
And then once you have a good critical edition, you don't need the manuscripts.
The history and the cultural life.
The manuscripts themselves are records of people's reading habits, of people's intellectual influences, of book production.
For example, many of these manuscripts stem from one small town in Bosnia, which for a brief time was a provincial capital
and had an intellectual flourishing, and suddenly it had numerous manuscript workshops churning out these things, and you can tell from the people who commissioned manuscripts, they're known from other things, like they founded libraries and institutions.
Like the history of the book, which is now... Exactly.
And so even though, I mean, to give you a Western example, is it...
really crucial to have 20 handwritten commonplace books consisting entirely of excerpts from things like Pilgrim's Progress.
Well, it might be if it throws a light on the community which created it, even though you are perfectly satisfied with the received version of the text itself.
Well, some people might question the wisdom of Owen Gingrich here in Harvard who traveled the world over 20 years to
to find and handle and to look at every first and second edition copy of Copernicus.
Why?
Because he had read somewhere or heard that this was the greatest book never read.
He said, well, he wanted to see.
Maybe let's determine who the earliest owners were and perhaps we can get something out of the annotations in each copy.
Well, it's all the same book.
But every one of these, it turns out to be a really critically important answer.
You know, every one is unique in its own way because it's certainly the ones that bear annotation.
I think that's kind of what you said.
Yeah, that's what I'm trying to say.
And its production and its function within culture is just such a great... Exactly.
I mean, they're not simply artifacts, as we all know, in terms of... I mean, in effect, I am not a bibliophile in the sense that I have no burning desire to acquire
even hardback copies necessarily.
I acquire books for their content.
You're talking about yourself.
I'm talking about myself, but I mean, but this is an instantiation of what books mainly are about.
You know, magnificent as they may be as artifacts, they are mainly about the transmission of knowledge and communicating ideas.
And that's what Anders is describing, and that's what people seem to forget.
And that's why, of course, they are a primary target.
Well, and then we go, I am going to have a chapter, and I've decided even how I'm going to frame it, and it starts with Harvard, and your book deposits are rejected, which is really quite a very significant commitment to books.
You're saving the books.
Believe me, there are places that I'm saving them.
Well, we certainly know from the history of the San Francisco Public Library.
I have a chapter on that.
I spent a week out there.
I will have the definitive chapter on the San Francisco Public Library.
There are only two people who haven't talked to me.
It's very interesting.
The architect, she's ducking me.
That's fine.
This woman who was president of the Friends of Marjorie Stratton, I can't understand why she won't talk to me.
She's very embarrassed about the way things went.
The day that library opened, there were 200,000 books that they had no shelf space for.
And this is what bothers me.
They got rid of them without even recording the copies.
They didn't even, these books weren't even worthy enough to be recorded.
I mean, when you send people to death camps, at least we might know who they are.
Their names might be recorded someplace.
These are books.
that represent the reading habits, the book culture of San Francisco at a time that these books were important and gone.
To me, that's a very anti-intellectual attitude.
Tell us about it.
To bring us full circle to Sarajevo, it's one of the tragedies of the Sarajevo library, is that their library catalogs burn.
The catalogs, absolutely.
Equally, I mean, they're
But they're a critical part of the apparatus.
So they don't know what they lost.
They don't know what they lost.
And in many cases, I mean in the case of Sarajevo, you're talking about the kind of material that will not turn up in most foreign libraries.
We're talking about small local literary journals, small town newspapers.
Archival materials.
When the National Library in Sarajevo was created,
It wasn't created until the end of World War II.
Before World War II, there were local cultural societies that had large functioning libraries.
And these were merged into the National Library, and then other collections were drawn in, everything from the Library of the Chamber of Commerce to so forth.
And so along with their libraries came their archives, a century of intellectual, political, and social life.
recorded in, you know, all kinds of ephemeral ways, which will be, you know, virtually impossible to reconstruct.
I mean, so you actually are very pessimistic about ephemeral.
This is something.
Well, they were successful in this point.
You cannot recreate the library.
You can reconstruct a library.
In other words, you can contribute to the reconstruction of a library, but you will never recreate what was.
I mean, libraries, like the National University Libraries, serve
a multiple function.
I mean, one is as a repository of a community's collective memory, and so you have the library serving this conserving function.
But libraries also serve a community, both the people who want to look into this record, but also in a very practical way.
Businessmen, engineers, teachers all need library materials.
Just checking everyone, so this stuff is so important.
Go ahead.
these are uh uh canada makia's publications he had an old at first for reasons of personal security uh but uh and this is out of hollis out of hollis yeah so it's under both uh samir akalil and uh anyway so one one is the conserving function the other one is the service function
for education and for practical purposes.
Now, the second one is much easier to reconstruct.
The 30,000 volumes promised by American university presses will go a very long way towards filling that gap.
And many of the new reference resources
are in many ways more functional than some of the old reference works that they may have lost.
And this is where the OCLC project.
And the OCLC project will also go a very long way, especially if, at the end of the article they say, they manage to draw in some of the European libraries.
It will go a very long way towards putting back together a major portion of the published
You know, the function of the National Library as a depository, where everything published in or about the country has at least one copy.
And given the realities of life, it may be that the majority of their copies will be either microforms of things which are now unobtainable, or reprints.
One of the very interesting things that came out of the burning of the Bosnian Library is when the first responses were a couple of Czech and German publishers offered at their own expense to reprint classics of Bosnian literature, they figured for these it was not enough to merely have a master microform somewhere.
These are things that people ought to have and which ought to be able to circulate something which in microphones and CDs really aren't
You talk about the mission of a national library.
I've been to the new French library, the new British library, the new German library.
Went up to Leipzig, where they're leading the world, and these preservation techniques are these big machines.
But every country has a different take on it, you see.
In France, the word you hear everywhere is patrimony.
French peck.
And you go to Italy, it's all humanism.
In Germany, I said, this is very interesting, you know.
You have two libraries that are now, you have the Düsseldorf Bucherei, which is East Germany, and they're all part of the German National Library.
So I asked the Director General, Professor Lehmann, I said, well, are there political considerations that come in?
I mean, are there things from East German history that you don't collect, or how do you decide collecting priorities?
It's very simple.
You can collect the language.
interesting way to do it.
I mean, anything in German or about Germany would collect.
It just seems to be a Gordian way of resolving whether it's about the Nazis or... Well, I have, I can Xerox for you, I have from the Bosnia National Library, one of their first post-war publications, is the result of a conference on the Bosnia National Library and Bosniaka, which is what they call the national
collections, and their basic definition, as I recall, was A, anything on any subject published within the country.
So they're perfectly happy to have a master copy of the works of Tito or whatever, as long as it was published in Bali as part of their history.
And the second is anything published in any language and anywhere about the country.
Germans are basically doing the same thing.
I think it's more dramatic there, actually.
At least the Germans are united by a language and a common culture.
Well, in Bosnia, everybody has the same language.
But they have different cultural strings.
They have different cultural strings, to be sure.
But Germany, too.
the United Germany is not very old.
That's right.
And then you go to Italy, they're princely collections.
But similarly, you go to Italy.
I just got back from Italy.
I said, why have you got so many different national libraries all over the place?
Well, I said, you know, Italy as a nation is only 130 years old.
Exactly.
And I was astonished to learn that ecclesiastical libraries, there are more than a thousand ecclesiastical libraries in Italy,
And they come for 27 million books, and that does not include the Vatican Library.
They don't consider themselves one of these ecclesiastical libraries.
Then you've got half a dozen national libraries.
Well, because they're not in Italy.
That's right.
That's exactly right.
But the ecclesiastical library is 27 million.
It's easily got to be as important as what's... So I went to a bunch of them.
I went to the March of Marociana, which just reopened.
Went to the Capitulario, which is wonderful.
It was totally forgotten.
and then a Monte Cassino, went to the Lorenziano, which is an ecclesiastical library.
Oh, if you're going to Venice, by the way, the first book ever printed in the Bosnian vernacular was printed in Venice.
It was a Catholic catechism called Nauchristiansky, and it was published, I think, around 1610 in Venice.
at a time when vernacular publishing still hadn't really gotten going very much in the Balkans.
Dubrovnik had a few Renaissance imprints, but in Serbia, as in Russia, they were still writing books in Church Slavonic, not in the vernacular.
This was distributed in Ottoman Bosnia.
Give me a status report.
How do you feel now?
You've been involved in this ever since almost it happened.
Can you try?
No, this is in reference to the... Sorry, Abel.
Sorry, Abel.
Why don't you just give me a little background about your involvement?
Well, Andros and I, I think, became immediately concerned with the situation in Bosnia at its very outset.
And since we worked as colleagues... Spring of 92.
and in one way or another tried, I think, to establish ways in which we could sort of actively engage the issue.
I started writing letters to the editor on June 11th, 1992.
June 11th being how many days afterwards?
Well, some months after the—no, no, it was before the library itself was destroyed, which was August 25th, 1992.
They started before this?
No, I mean, cultural daily destruction was obvious from the first month of the war.
I mean, you saw pictures in the newspapers of, you know, churches and mosques burned down.
The Oriental Institute in Sarajevo was burned on May 17, 1992.
Also, I mean, general concern over human rights motivated my interest before it became clear that, you know, what can, I think, be fairly called cultural genocide was part of the program.
That was abundantly clear by the time the events of the summer happened and the targeting of cultural institutions was obvious.
I think that the first, as Andras probably pointed out in the first time... Over on the wall there?
Both of us first thought would happen.
The first thing that I think both of us thought is that there are all these professional groups and international organizations.
Surely they ought to do something.
Someone ought to do something.
Should it be UNESCO, the American Library Association, or whatever.
And so the first thing we did is we tried to get organizations to respond.
And the universal response was, we don't meddle in political matters.
Yes, particularly political matters in obscure places that we don't understand.
Yeah, as if the destruction of two million books was a political act.
And as if that was an obscure matter.
Yes.
So what happened is
In the fall of 92, when it became quite clear that no professional organization was going to do anything, we started simply networking on our own.
We had stacks of faxes, we made phone calls, we put out calls on the internet, there were discussions at great length, and finally we decided that we would essentially form our own group.
over 350 academics and librarians who sign this appeal on cultural genocide.
And we managed to raise enough money to take out a full-page ad in the New York Times.
We flew standby on the New York Times.
A full-page ad is very expensive, but you get a little price break if you don't specify a date and a place on the issue.
And so we were sort of circling and waiting for almost a month and a half until it got placed, and it appeared on March 31st of 1993, finally.
The ad itself brought enough response that we were able to republish the ad in the New York Review of Books on July 15th of the same year, 1993.
You'd think the New York Review would almost give you the space.
Well, actually, New York Review gave us a very good break on Price.
I mean, this seems to be the kind of thing that they should be most supportive of.
Well, no, it's strange.
I mean, the New York Review, in terms of its choice of writers, has an equivocal history relative to Bosnia.
Really?
In part, I mean, they did provide a venue for Susan Sontag's memorable and deeply moving account,
She went to Saevo.
Her experience there.
If that's of interest to you, I can get you a copy.
That would be great.
I want to interview Susan Sontag, by the way.
Uh-huh.
Well, then you should, if you do, I would recommend that you read this in advance.
Was that published in 93, I think?
When was that?
Or was that early 94?
I mean, I have the copy readily available.
You give me an address, and I'll send you a card.
Oh, of course.
I'll give you another one.
One to take home, isn't it?
Yeah.
But the...
But they employed Misha Glenny as their sort of primary reviewer of... Make sure this all sticks together.
I just checked and it's taken perfectly.
Okay, so I hope you got enough.
I could get you back to that.
So this is...
That's an article from the French Archaeology Journal.
This is from the Simmons alumni mag.
And they gave me an alumni award for the Login Award from their library school.
Anyway, the only utility of this is it has a talk I gave there, which sort of outlines what Jeff and I told you about the whole history of our involvement.
That's terrific.
And this is somebody else who spoke there by the name of Walter Crawford of the Research Libraries Group.
I told you about him.
And the Millennial Librarian, I'm sure.
That's not that interesting.
The references are at the bottom, so the focus is this book, actually.
Next one.
Excellent.
All right.
Now, the other things I've found are phone numbers and stuff.
Right.
Okay.
Whatever.
Whatever he wants.
He's wanted me to see, so.
You can mail it to me.
I think I better.
It's not in an obvious location right now.
No, I can tell you exactly what it means.
No, it's not this.
But it was like that.
OK.
Anyway, I'll put it in .
So I got everything, right?
Except for that .
Oh, I found it.
Oh, wonderful.
Excellent.
The greatest wizard of book.
Oh, God.
When he was here, I took a lot of oysters, you know.
And he said if his wife found out that he was having oysters without her, he said it would be divorce.
He absolutely adores as well.
Okay, so that first one... Yeah, yeah.
I have 50 of these notebooks, and now they're 250 hours to take.
I have to fill two file cabinets with material.
So, words of the psychoanalyst who I do for the last book, Norman, Haskell Norman.
He says, listen to me now.
I'm your mother.
He says, this is my business.
He says, it's time to go home and write your book.
You've got too much stuff.
The other thing I'll do for you is, let's see.
It's coming.
The other thing I'll do for you is, I have a work in progress, an article that was to go into a proposed volume entitled The Holocaust and the Book.
The publisher didn't like the article, so I have to rework it.
I'll send you the draft, and you can mine it for whatever you want.
Also, I would like to cite it, so tell me how to cite it.
It could even be from an unpublished article, or by that time, it would be a published article.
Well, do you cite websites?
I cite everything where I get my materials from.
Most of my information, and there's a good notice, so you can just say,
And such and such a source cited in the publisher.
Will I have to remind you to finish this?
I can email it to you right now.
You can email it to me even?
Email it to me.
OK.
And you're very welcome.
Thank you so much for having me here.
Look, I just want a hard-written thank to the author
After we turn the Institute, which built a national collection here, is K.W.
Schmerz.
You want a translation of anything into anything.
Do you hear that call it?
Yes.
You do animals and artems.
And I will get you the script.
Really?
Yes.
This is the biggest book.
As you can see, it's very rare.
It doesn't matter how badly it's been.
It's really kind of mad at it.
Frazo actually purchased some 12th character printed books, and his challenge went through great things trying to make sure everything's the last copy of this book.
This is a practical book on this
Nicholas Tolstoy?
I think it's Nicholas.
Oh, it's Nicolai.
I interviewed Nicolai Tolstoy.
That's right.
That's not the sun.
Is he going to be sure?
I want to try it out.
I think it's this way, yeah.
That's it.
It just looked like it, didn't it?
Yeah.
But I should think there's very much a very steady spirit.
The last generation of giants, you know, he reads 20 different languages, half of which are extinct.
Yeah.
And then, you know, he studied at Charles University in Prague, University of Lebanon, Belgium, Harvard.
Somebody told me about it.
Yeah.
Anyway, he was one of the people who helped set up the Ukrainian Institute.
My conscience is much relieved that Nadia has attacked it.
One thing you should know, Kenoff's article is about the Atari Raghavada, as you know.
For rather weird political notions, he left a couple of things on set, or sort of alluded to it.
Yeah, why don't you call me afterwards?
Basically, what he only alludes to in the end is how the Haggadah was rescued during war.
No, no, no, no.
When the museum came under shell fire in the summer of 92, the Haggadah was rescued and put into a wall.
He doesn't have that in the article?
No, he is symbolistic.
Let me read it.
The team director afterwards claimed that he risked all kinds of weird drugs, circumstances, and that came out to bodies of his disability.
And meanwhile, we were celebrating with this, and it resulted in a libelous article in the New Republic.
They never issued a retraction.
How do I get out of here?
Okay, let me show you where.
No, I know.
Okay, thank you, I know.
in this effort, but in my initial communications to him, he misunderstood there to be a national library and a university library, and consequently they decided, well, then they should provide two copies.
Well, as a matter of fact, there are a whole great number of faculty libraries at the university which do exist, ten of which were destroyed as well in the course of the war.
And so,
So this has proved to be a great benefit to our project, to have second copies, because they can be allocated not only to faculty libraries, but also, sort of say, the University of Tuzla library and... You don't have to explain it.
It's so obvious why, you know, that... Anyway, we tried to... It's my fond hope that we'll be able to encourage some of the other presses at some point to...
But how about the initial goal of trying to replicate the losses?
Well, no, no.
I mean, the same thing is, as I, in effect, said earlier, we won't replicate the losses.
The in-gathering projects, you know, every manuscript reclaimed, however, virtually, will be, you know, one strike for history and knowledge and culture.
But there's simply no way.
When the Oriental Institute burned and its thousands of original manuscripts went up in smoke, there is no way that anything but a small fraction of those will be retrieved, in total, at least.
So at least in terms of my focus, that is on the practical matter of trying to reconstruct adequate collections to support
the ongoing and critical process of education.
You know, I mean, no society has a future if its students, its young people aren't educated.
This was a blow, you know, another blow against the future of Bosnia by sort of undermining the capacity of the educational process to
Are you saying then that this attempt at cultural genocide was at least partially successful?
Well, one cannot deny that at this point it's clear that approximately 2,000 monuments of historical notes were destroyed, that these enormous library collections and other archives were destroyed, and you can
Your efforts, you can make strenuous efforts to create functioning institutions, functioning educational, cultural institutions, but you cannot fully retrieve what was lost.
There's simply no way.
In some cases, with architecture, you can create simulacra,
But those simulacra will have none of the authentic and original furnishings.
Monuments aren't simply the mortar.
Three weeks ago I was at Monte Cassino.
As a matter of fact, I was amazed that there was a library to see at Monte Cassino.
Are they totally rebuilt?
I mean, it looks like an ancient abbey.
Did you see on my web page the story of the Naples?
Yes, I printed it out.
I mean, that's a really amazing thing.
Yeah, that's right.
All of these stories you see are all... This is what a million and a half books burning looks like.
Wow.
And this book here is... Sorry for the Wounded City.
It's a picture diary of the first year of the siege.
Look at that.
I mean, you can see clearly enough.
We might want to get copies of these.
I mean, my publisher might.
They really are.
I can probably connect you with the... I can connect you probably with the
This was just published in Sarajevo after the war.
This book was.
One of the many sad things about the destruction of the library was that... I want to take down the publication information.
The head cataloger...
As you doubtless know from the conversations with Kondrash, a further catalyst to our practical action was the visit of Dr. Kiyunjic, the director of the National Library here in October of 1994.
That really galvanized our efforts in a more practical direction.
We sort of facilitated his meeting with various people here at Harvard, at MIT, at the Boston Public Library, at Simmons College,
And ultimately, he did give his public address at the Boston Public Library that James Carroll attended, which led then further to Carroll's series of essays in the Globe, which you are aware of.
And that ultimately proved extraordinarily beneficial to our project, because he, as
When the war finally ended, and Carroll wrote his sort of exhortation to support our project, that elicited a response from the public.
It also, this series of essays were something that we could take to President Brudenstein, in effect.
Jim's essays.
It so happens that Jackie O'Neill, the personal assistant to President Nudenstein, was a close personal friend of James Carroll.
That didn't occur either.
I've interviewed Jim several times.
Yeah, yeah, I saw that you'd done something relative to his memoir.
I did the big Peter Publishers Weekly piece, and I did a column for my newspaper column, and I've interviewed him several times.
way back.
I see.
I read his memoir, it was a remarkable, fascinating book, and of course, in a more modest way, I, and at a younger age, I had a very similar, a parallel experience, you know, well, you know, I mean,
My father was the colonel in the reserves, after all, not a general in charge or whatever.
But nevertheless, you know, being an activist in the anti-war movement, it made it... What I found, the critical difference between our experiences was that he didn't participate in the Cultural Revolution.
He participated in the... In other words, he was older, he was a priest,
And so sort of my embrace of counterculture was simply didn't play—you notice, it was completely absent from his memoir.
He was living with priests, at least.
Yeah, so it was very interesting to see the similarities and contrast in our own personal experience.
And it was an exceptionally compelling story.
Best book he ever wrote, and it's non-fiction, you know, and he's known for his novels.
Yeah, well... I'll give him a call, actually.
The guy in his front phone, I guess there's no problem.
He might actually get his comments on this.
Is there a text available of the talk that was given at the DPL, do you think?
No, I don't remember that we have one.
I would like to say it was very forceful.
He's a very angry man, but he's a very angry man under control, and his English is excellent.
He did a Master's at the University of Chicago, and he was a very compelling exponent for the library.
It was very interesting because many months later the head cataloger came, and she
She was in a state of acute post-traumatic stress when she arrived here.
And she was a shambles, an emotional shambles.
We had thought that she would give a similar talk at the Austin Public Library, only to discover that she was so terrified at the prospect of the Serbs attending, you know, someone taking her name.
You know, that she was petrified and refused to permit us any publicity.
Consequently, we had her talk, but there were six total in the room, including herself and Arash and myself.
And it was tragic because I have a text.
I have a text of that.
Because it was a very different kind of talk.
She was not an executive.
She was not in charge.
speaking for the institution.
She was speaking as an individual who had suffered the trauma of a two-hour commute on foot every day from the furthest suburb in government hands to the library under shell fire.
And I will happily give you one.
I'll use it to cite it, of course.
This is precisely the stuff I'm looking for.
And I must say that by the halfway through her talk, everyone in that room, including herself and us, were in tears.
It was just... Did the BPL routinely, did they videotape these?
No.
Well, they certainly didn't record.
I mean, as I say, I have her text.
Do we have a record of Kouroudis's address at the BPL?
I don't remember.
I have a copy of his type script.
It's kind of chaotic, but it's all pretty good.
It's a lot.
Nothing wrong with that.
I'd like to ask if I had this at hand.
This is Sabre Foundation, our partner with this project.
Well, I can photopop it for you.
Why don't I do that right now?
It's just S-A-B-R-E?
Yeah, www.sabre.org.
and just look for their blogging page, and you'll get a lot of it.
If that's on the site, then, Jeff, I can pull it out.
Is there anything in here?
Maybe.
I mean, you might as well, I think.
Anyway, can you hand me a pen?
I can give you something out of that here.
There you are.
First of all, you can get your own copy of this book.
One of the people you should go visit is the guy from whom I bought this book.
He is a very amazing gentleman.
I'll give you a copy of his card.
Is he the person from whom I could get a copy of this book?
Yes.
He is Bosnia's largest book distributor and book import exporter.
His name is Mr. Shaheen Prashic.
I'll get you his card.
Okay, good.
That's great.
Mr. Shaheen Prashic is a very amazing gentleman.
Thanks a lot.
First of all, your pen here.
Oh, OK.
Yep, I got another pen.
You want to hold on to that pen?
No.
You got another one out here.
Confused, because I thought I'd made some other Xeroxes.
I just wondered why I put them.
Um, Mr. Schein, I thought they just